So, welcome to
Line Tracking also known as Ray-Casting. In this video,
I'm going to explain that line tracking, also known as ray casting, is a very useful tool in game development,
used for all sorts of things from laser trip wires to predicting
paths of bullets, to what we're going to use it for, which is reaching out and working out what we can grab
and pick up. So, imagine we shine a virtual laser into the world. That's the essence
of what we're doing here, and we've got the ability to interrogate what's actually been
hit. We can use different view modes, in the engine, to visualize
what we would actually end up intercepting with, and that's really cool, and you'll see that in a moment.
And we will be simply simulating physics on
objects that we want to be able to lift, and by setting simulate physics, we are going to be
setting the object channel, which is what the ray cast is going to use
to ignore things like floors, walls, and doors, and to focus on the things that we want to
be able to lift, like tables, chairs, and the like. So, let's dive in and see
how it works. By the end of the video, you'll be doing things like visualizing your world from a
collision viewpoint like this, and you'll also have read a very helpful blog post
from Unreal, that will help you understand this stuff.
So this debug trace we've drawn is just to help us
visualize what's going on, but the system is not actually doing a line trace
or ray cast yet, that's a completely different thing. By the way,
this debug trace will still exist if you hit launch rather than play.
What hitting launch will do is actually make a version for your platform, your Mac, your
PC, and it'll make an executable. It is a good idea to actually
build and run the game properly like this. This is an actual PC app now,
a 64 bit PC app. And you'll see we've still got this debug trace there,
we've also got some warnings about the lighting, because we didn't rebuild the lighting. So,
it does stay there, even when you're not inside the editor, but it isn't
actually... By the way, to get out it's Alt + F + 4 on the PC or Command
and W on a Mac. But it isn't actually a ray cast, we
can't actually query to say what it's hitting, it's not intercepting anything, etc. So,
what we need to do is think about how we're actually going to line
trace in the world. Before I show you lots of cool things, I want you to  just do something which is
to go and read Unreal's blog post here, about collision filtering,
and I want you to, when you read it, realize that the same rules apply
to the line tracing that we're going to be doing and share your understanding
of collision filtering in the discussions for us. I'll just click the blog so you
can see you're going to the right place. When you arrive, it
should look something like this. My broadband is on the go slow this evening. There you go, that's what you're looking for! So,
go ahead, pause the video, take a quick read of this now!
Cool welcome back! So, this world
here, on the left hand side, you're seeing the visibility geometry, the visible
geometry of the world all the complex geometry. On the right, you've got a very simplified version
which is used for collision and for line tracing in the world. Now,
back in Unreal look at this, we can actually do this. What we
can do is we can click on the top-left of our 3D Viewport, where it
is lit, and click on there and you get a load of view modes. One of those is Player
Collision. That immediately shows us a couple of problems, the light
cyan stuff here is static meshes. Now, the chair, of course,
should be moveable. So, if you click on the chair, click on details, and go
over to Moveable there under the transform, we've not made the chair
moveable because we want it to be moveable. The other problem that it shows up is that the doors
are not collidable with. And actually, if I play my game in
normal lit view, I can pass straight through the doors right now.
There you go! So,
why can I pass through the doors? Well, this is actually a version control problem. Do you remember
that we used to ignore the starter content? And if you look at a door and right-click
and go Edit SM_Door, my door doesn't
have its collision mesh on it anymore, so make sure your door does. If it doesn't,
add another Box Collider on and save. And when you
save that, you'll notice from the source control, if we look at what's different right
now... Just wait a second, here you go! ...that there's a door asset
file here, it's the only thing I've changed in this video, and it's stored in the starter content
folder. We used to ignore the starter content, so what happened is we lost those changes,
we lost track of those changes. If at this stage you think, well
actually what are we tracking and what aren't we tracking in source control? Then, just go
ahead and take a look all the way back here at
your .getignore, and remind yourself what you're ignoring. We're happy ignoring these
folders, we talked about those earlier. We are still ignoring Textures and
HDRI. They're the only things we're ignoring in the starter content.
So, still if you change anything in these folders, any of your Textures or HDRI stuff,
it will get forgotten but everything else will be remembered now. So, always keep in
touch with what you're ignoring. We're ignoring those things, of course, because they're huge remember.
OK, so here we are! We've read that blog, we've got some
idea that this world has visability
that can be looked at two ways. You can either look at it from a collision point of view, which is showing
us the trigger volume here, the static meshes here, and now the dynamic things
which are both the door and the chair. Or you can look at things from a Visability
Collision viewpoint. Now, if you click on that, you're not seeing the only
thing that really changes in detail is the chair. It goes from a very blocky
collider volume, like that, to that. Now, we can
actually decide, when we line trace in the world, whether we want to take notice of
all these details of this geometry or not, and in our case we don't. It's fine to just
say that the little red line that we're going to have from our pawn is intersecting
anyway in this collision geometry. That's good enough as a line trace
hit. So this is a cool view, and it allows us to see
the world from the viewpoint of how the collisions and the line traces are going to work.
The question comes, if I bring a new item into the
world... So, I go to Content Browser... I didn't mean to close that tab, by the way.
I just clicked the wrong thing. ...and Props and say I bring in a
table, like this, and drop it in, and it quite nicely defaults to
the floor. There it is! Now, it look really funny in this view, of course,
but if I go back to the standard view, for which there is a shortcut. It's Alt 4, let me do that!
Alt 4. Then, the table is there sitting on
the floor, but from a collision point of view, at the moment, this is just a static
piece of scenery. And what I want to be able to do is to make the life as easy as
possible for us, when we come to rapid level building, so that we
can very quickly, ideally in a single click, tell the system that this chair isn't just scenery
and that it's moveable. And the very most meaningful way to do that is to
click on the table rather, come down to under Physics,
and you just click Simulate Physics and immediately blow that. It's asking
for the mass in kilograms. You could say 15 kilos, for example.
By doing that a few things change. It becomes moveable, which makes sense if it's
physics objects, but also under Collision here, we have Collision Presets
and it's set it to PhysicsActor. And the object type
has actually changed, but there's a little bit of a bug in the Editor, which means we have to click off the object
and back on it to get to see what the new object types is. So, the
Object Type becomes PhysicsBody. OK, so from the
article you read, it talked about two types of filtering. One was filtering by the type of
line trace, which we're not doing here, and the other is sorting by the type of object.
And we're going to do that, we're going to filter by the type of object. We're going to
say that the types of things that we can pick up are any physics objects,
PhysicsBody object types. So you click on the door, it's not, it's a WorldStatic,
and the walls are WorldStatic and the floor is WorldStatic and the trigger volume
has some sort of collision type. What is it? It's WorldDynamic. But the only
things that have the collision type PhysicsBody are the chair
and the table. Now, why doesn't the chair have
that correct type? Because we haven't yet simulated physics on the chair. We click
Simulate Physics, give it a sensible mass immediately, and that's all you're going to have to change!
Super simple for the designer! And we can even give ourselves a limit
to how heavy a thing we can lift. So, for example, we can come in and
we could stick a light on the wall right. There it is, let me just
see it in Alt 4. In this view, move the light up a little bit.
Now, I can decide, do I want that to be moveable or now? If I don't,
I just leave it as it is and that is a piece of scenery. If I want
to be able to move the light, I can set physics on it and set a mass. Now, in this view
things that are cyan are just static and we cannot lift.
Things that are purple here, or magenta rather, are
dynamic objects but we also can't lift them. We can only lift the green things,
which are the physics objects. Also, we have a green thing here, which is
a completely different type of thing, a trigger volume just happens to use the same color, but it associates
visually quite nicely. These are the things that we could lift and put down over here.
I really like it, it's a really simple way of doing it. So, we're going to use Object
Channel Filtering, and all we need to do to tag an object to be something
that we want to be able to grab, as I said, is to just simulate physics
and while you're there give it a mass. That will in turn set the object type to PhysicsBody,
provided you click on and off again to fix the editor bug, and it's that
PhysicsBody object type that we're going to use to filter. That's one of many
object types, that we can set under Project Settings,
Collision, and then Object Channels. We've got a bunch of
Default Object Channels. You can add more Object Channels here, but that just gives you more work
to do. Why not take advantage of the fact that when you simulate physics, you automatically become
a PhysicsActor that automatically has a PhysicsBody object type.
OK, by the way, all these presets are also accessible
under Project Settings, Collision, if you really care you can go to Preset,
and you can see all of these here. Well, not all of them, only the ones that are exposed
and actually the PhysicsActor is not one of those that is exposed. So, we
don't need to worry about that. We just need to know that by putting physics on, we are
making the thing respond to the Physics Engine, number one, which is fun. So, if I
bang into things, it's not going to work with the Pawn, but later one they'll move.
Number two, they have a mass which you could use later to determine a limit to how much we can
lift, and number three, they set a collision preset that means we have a Physics
Body, which we can use for filtering so that we don't try and lift walls, floors,
ceilings, or doors. So, that's that! I'll see you in the next video, when we actually
start doing some line tracing.